There is currently a large body of work, particularly in health and cognitive ageing exploring the
effects of ageing on both healthy ageing individuals and individuals with diseases frequently
associated with ageing such as dementias and stroke. One of the key areas of investigation has
related to documenting and describing age-related cognitive decline and, more recently,
documenting the benefits associated with healthy ageing, such as how knowledge and experience
can, to some extent, offset or ameliorate age-related decline (Park, 2012). This can be evidenced
particularly when people are functioning in familiar, everyday environments and doing routine
activities (Park & Hall Gutchess, 2012). One way in which these activities are mediated is through
the use of language. With regard to language in particular, research has explored if and how
language declines with age and whether language ability has been related to aspects of cognitive
ability and neurological health (Kemper, Greiner, Prenovost, & Mitzner, 2001). Christensen,
Anstey, Leach, and MacKinnon (2007) discussed how the oral and written language of older adults
may act as an early indicator of cognitive health as well as a potential indicator of cognitive or
brain reserve. Cognitive reserve has been associated as a protective factor in terms of cognitive
health and has also been linked with lower risk of diseases such as dementia (Riley, Snowdon,
Desrosiers, & Markesbery, 2005); however, the exact mechanisms and structure of the reserve is
not clear (Christensen et al., 2007). Linguistic function, in particular, has been explored and
proposed as a way of detecting subtle and subclinical changes in cognition as reflected through
language which may, in turn, be an indicator of cognitive decline. Researchers from both literary
and ageing fields have demonstrated how linguistic measures can provide indices of linguistic
change over time. For example, the linguistic abilities as evidenced in published works by Iris
Murdoch (who had a confirmed diagnosis of Alzheimer dementia post mortem) and of Agatha
Christie (who had suspected but unconfirmed diagnosis of Alzheimer's dementia [AD])
demonstrated declines in measures of linguistic complexity (Garrard, 2009; Garrard, Maloney,
Hodges, & Patterson, 2005; Lancashire, 2010; Le, Lancashire, Hirst, & Jokel, 2011). Among
studies into ageing which incorporated linguistic measures and related these to cognitive abilities,
one of the hallmark studies was the Nun Study conducted by Snowdon et al. (Riley et al., 2005;
Snowdon, 2001). As part of the Nun Study, Kemper et al. compared the early adult and later life
linguistic abilities of a large group of nuns by analysing autobiographical letters in early adult life
upon entry to the convent (Kemper, Greiner, et al., 2001; Kemper, Thomson, & Marquis, 2001;
Mitzner & Kemper, 2003). The written language was analysed for both grammatical complexity
and the relative number of ideas or propositions contained in the texts (as measured by
Propositional Idea Density (PD) - see below for discussion). Overall, their findings indicated that
measures of informativeness, as measured by PD, were a sensitive predictor of language decline
with age and also a sensitive predictor of AD (as later confirmed by autopsy in the Nun Study
participants). Needless to say, the relationship between language, cognition and cognitive health is
complex and there is not a linear relationship between linguistic ability and cognition. Other
cognitive functions, such as working memory, have been demonstrated to be part of the complex
picture (Kemper, 2012). This present research, however, focuses on the use of one linguistic
measure, PD, to investigate levels of informativeness in written language samples from a group of
Australian men.
Measuring language decline of informativeness with age using propositional density
Until recently, there has been a relative paucity of information about older adults’ discourse skills
(Kemper & Kemtes, 2012). The analysis of discourse skills is of interest as it provides insight into
how effectively and efficiently people both convey and process information. There are a number of
ways of analysing discourse for conveying information, particularly disordered discourse
(Armstrong, Ferguson, & Simmons-Mackie, 2013). PD is one method that has been used to
quantify the amount of information that a speaker or writer conveys. The PD score is derived from
a ratio of the number of words identified as indicators of underlying propositions relative to the
total number of words in the sample. As discussed above, it is a measure that has been shown to be
sensitive to and perhaps an early indicator of cognitive decline (Kemper, Greiner, et al., 2001;
Mitzner & Kemper, 2003; Snowdon, 2001) and is thought to be associated with processing
efficiency and cognitive reserve (Kemper, Thomson, et al., 2001). High levels of PD have been
86 E. Spencer et al.
associated with maintaining cognitive health in late old age and low PD has been associated with
the development of AD (Riley et al., 2005). As part of the Nun Study, written autobiographical
texts prepared by the novices at average age 22 years upon entry to the convent were analysed and
compared to the participants’ later life language samples (mean age 83.1 years), and cognitive
abilities and Alzheimer pathology as determined at autopsy. Similar results were replicated in a
later study by Engelman, Agree, Meoni, and Klag (2010) accessing the John Hopkins Precursor
study entry essays and follow-up with participants from the age cohort 1917–1936 (Engelman
et al., 2010). Recently, Chand, Baynes, Bonnici, and Farais (2012) have found that PD is a
measure that is able to differentiate between the discourse of people with AD and healthy ageing
adults (Chand et al., 2012).
Much of the research into PD has been with people with AD and has involved healthy ageing
matched control participants. Scores for PD have been reported but these results are mixed and
difficult to interpret. For example, the range of scores provided for healthy ageing individuals is
large and, for those with AD, high and low scores of PD have been determined relative to the
sample (Riley et al., 2005). For example, in the Nun Study PD scores in the lower third of the
sample were described as 'lower' and those in the top third as 'higher'. Ferguson, Spencer,
Craig, and Colyvas (2014) recently contributed to knowledge of the range of PD for healthy
women across the adult lifespan from three age cohorts born between 1973-78, 1946-51 and
1921-26 over a 16-year-period. This study analysed free text responses from 19 512 respondents
to the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women's Health. In total 37 705 responses were analysed
for PD using freely downloadable software, the Computerised Propositional Idea Density Rater
(CPIDR 3) (Brown, Snodgrass, & Covington, 2007). PD was found to be relatively stable for the
cohorts across the 16-year time period during which five surveys were conducted at 3-year
intervals. For the younger cohort born between 1973 and 78 and mid-aged cohort born between
1946 and 51 at the start of the survey periods, average PD was found to be 0.54 propositions per
word (5.4 propositions per 10 words).1 A small but significant drop in PD of 0.01 propositions per
word (0.1 propositions per 10 words) was found for the older age cohort born between 1921 and
26 (Ferguson et al., 2014). This rate of decline in PD scores for the older cohort was lower than
those previously published for healthy ageing individuals such as those reported by Kemper and
Sumner (2001). They found a decline of 0.2 propositions per word (2.0 propositions per 10 words)
over a similar age span (Kemper & Sumner, 2001).
In their study of John Hopkins Precursor study participants, Engelman et al. (2010) investigated
PD in a total of 18 cases of people diagnosed with dementia and 36 matched control participants.
Engelman et al. reported mean PD of 0.470 per word (4.7 per 10 words) for participants with
dementia and 0.499 per word (4.99 per 10 words) for the control participants. While the majority
of the participants were male, the mean figures do include the female participants due to pooling.
Using a two sample t-test, the researchers found a statistically significant difference in PD scores
for the control and the participants with a diagnosis of AD. Additionally, Engelman et al. found
that the difference between the Precursor Study participants and controls was statistically
significant thereby replicating the Nun Study findings of lower PD in earlier adulthood leading to
higher risk of the development of AD. It is interesting to note that these mean PD scores for a
homogenous group of participants (i.e. same levels of education) is lower than the average PD
scores of 0.53 per 1 word (5.3 per 10 words) reported for the large sample of older women
reported by Ferguson et al. (2014) and also for the Nun Study with means of 0.550 per 1 word
(5.5 per 10 words) (Kemper, Greiner, et al., 2001; Mitzner & Kemper, 2003).
1The convention of reporting PD scores per 10 words has traditionally been used, however, CPIDR uses the format of reporting PD per word.
For ease of comparison with previous studies, we have chosen to report in both formats, PD per word and PD per 10 words.
Propositional idea density in older men's written language 87
Chand et al. (2012) investigated PD using manual analysis in an ethnically and gender diverse
population of 87 older adults, 48% of whom were male. Thirty eight participants had no cognitive
impairment, 35 had mild cognitive impairment and 14 had a diagnosis of dementia syndrome. The
mean age of the participants was 74.6 years. Mean PD scores for the subgroups with no cognitive
impairment was 0.403 per word (4.03 per 10 words), 0.404 per word (4.04 per 10 words) for those
with a clinical diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 0.377 per word (3.77 per
10 words) for those with dementia. It is important to note that these scores are lower than other
published results and the sample data were oral rather than written narrative. The authors stated
that they found no effect of gender or education on PD. Gender will be discussed further below.
The population used in this study is from the same population as reported by Farais et al. for a
slightly smaller group (81 participants, mean age 76.3 years, 47% male) (Farais et al., 2012). The
average PD for the healthy ageing group was reported to be 0.308 per word (3.80 per 10 words)
and 0.390 and 0.350 for the MCI and dementia groups, respectively. Again, this is lower than PD
findings reported for written language samples such as the ALSWH, Nun Study and John Hopkins
Precursor study populations summarised above. Mitzner and Kemper (2003) reported mean PD for
oral language samples of Nun Study participants (mean age 83 years) as 0.499 (4.99 per 10 words)
and 0.550 (5.50 per 10 words) for written language samples.
It is well recognised in sociolinguistics that topic, mode (e.g. spoken or written) and audience
impacts on language use in discourse. In relation to the issue of spoken versus written texts,
Mitzner and Kemper (2003) found that written language samples differentiated more effectively
than oral samples between Nun Study participants with differing levels of cognitive functioning
(Mitzner & Kemper, 2003). Mitzner and Kemper cautioned against comparisons of scores across
spoken and written discourse sample and recommended that PD scores from written discourse
samples be used as they were more indicative of overall language ability when compared to other
linguistic measures and cognitive ability (Mitzner & Kemper, 2003). This means that direct
comparison of PD scores across studies is difficult due to a variety of factors that can impact on
discourse including spoken or written texts and issues such as the size of the texts analysed
(i.e. number of words), or the topic being written about. In relation to sample size, in both the
Nun Study and the John Hopkins Precursor studies, the number of words for the texts analysed was
not specified but the authors stated that the last 10 sentences of the letters or essays were analysed.
Spencer, Craig, Ferguson, and Colyvas (2012) and Ferguson et al. (2014) analysed large numbers
of texts which varied from 10 words to over 200. In the studies discussed above, all texts were
written in response to a stimulus prompt.
In summary, PD is a tantalising measure given the literature demonstrating its potential as a
marker of cognitive health (Spencer et al., 2012). Therefore its potential, particularly in its
computerised form, as a clinical tool is worthy of exploration. However, in order to determine
clinically significant changes in PD (and other linguistic measures) in ageing adult populations,
baselines of PD in healthy ageing adults needs to established. As discussed above, many of the
studies have reported on PD levels for women, and to a lesser extent, men. Linguistic measures for
men are worth investigating given the mixed findings regarding the effects of gender on language
(Ullman, Miranda, & Travers, 2011). Collecting and analysing this data would further contribute
to a growing reference set of typical language use in ageing adults (Ferguson et al., 2014; Spencer
et al., 2012).